# Bubble Sort

Bubble Sort, sometimes referred to as *sinking sort*, is the simplest sorting algorithm that works by repeatedly swapping the adjacent elements if they are in wrong order. It works by having the largest values "bubble" up to the top (or smaller values to the bottom). This simple algorithm performs poorly in real world use and is used primarily as an educational tool. More efficient algorithms such as Quicksort, Timsort, or Merge Sort are used by the sorting libraries built into popular programming languages such as Python and Java.

Due to its simplicity, Bubble Sort is often used to introduce the concept of a sorting algorithm. In computer graphics it is popular for its capability to detect a very small error (like swap of just two elements) in almost-sorted arrays and fix it with just linear complexity (*2n*). For example, it is used in a polygon filling algorithm, where bounding lines are sorted by their *x* coordinate at a specific scan line (a line parallel to *x* axis) and with incrementing *y* their order changes (two elements are swapped) only at intersections of two lines.

> **<ins>Time Complexity</ins>**
> * Bubble Sort has a worst case time complexity of **O(n<sup>2</sup>)**, which occurs when array is reverse sorted.
> * Bubble Sort also has an average time complexity of **O(n<sup>2</sup>)**
> * In the best case where the input array is already sorted, Bubble Sort has a **O(n)** time complexity.

### Exercise

Write a function called `bubbleSort` that takes an array of numbers, and returns the sorted array with all the numbers sorted from smallest to largest. Additionally, you should be able to see how the largest numbers "bubble" up to the end of the array.

Examples:
* Random

  `bubbleSort([9,0,7,3,4,6,8,2,1,5]) // [0,1,2,3,4,5,5,6,7,8,9]`

* Nearly Sorted

  `bubbleSort([8,1,2,3,4,5,6,7]) // [1,2,3,4,5,5,6,7,8]`

* Reversed

  `bubbleSort([9,8,7,6,5,4,3,2,1]) // [1,2,3,4,5,5,6,7,8,9]`

* Few Unique

  `bubbleSort([4,5,2,4,5,1,3,5,4,5,3,5,3,2,4]) // [1,2,2,3,3,3,4,4,4,4,5,5,5,5,5]`
> **Note:** You should also see the status of the array after each pass in the console!

---

### Solution
```js
function bubbleSort(arr) {
  //  Loop over input array from end to start
  for(let i = arr.length - 1; i > 0; i--) {
    //  Initialize a variable to check whether any swaps
    //  have been made in the current pass
    let swapped = false;
    //  Start another loop from start to 2nd last element
    for(let j = 0; j < i; j++) {
      //  If current element is greater than next element, swap them!
      if (arr[j] > arr[j + 1]) {
        [arr[j], arr[j + 1]] = [arr[j + 1], arr[j]];
        swapped = true;
      }
    }
    //  Break out of outer loop if no swaps have been made
    if(!swapped) break;
  }
  //  Return the sorted array
  return arr;
}
```

## References
[Toptal - Bubble Sort Visualization](https://www.toptal.com/developers/sorting-algorithms/bubble-sort)

[GeeksforGeeks - Bubble Sort](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/bubble-sort/)

[Wikipedia - Bubble Sort](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bubble_sort)